# Generation of a ground truth dataset for statistical testing

Many ground truth datasets containing two-species mixes or spiked-in peptides often provide very high fold changes or have little variance since all mixes come from the same tube. Such effects do not model a realistic proteomics experiment, since cell seeding alone introduces variance right at the beginning of the protocol propagating through the whole experimental procedure. Therefore we seeded HeLa cells in 12 replicates and processed them as in a normal proteomics experiment, to model background variance. After lysis we added an *E.coli* DH5*a* lysate in different ratios right at the beginning of the protocol to get more realistic protocol variance in our data. 

## Methods
### Sample preparation

Cells were lysed in 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM TCEP, 4 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 30 min on ice. Lysates were diluted to 1 M Urea using 100 mM Tris pH 8 buffer and digested usign 1:50 LysC (WAKO) and 1:100 Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were purified by Waters Oasis Prime HLB (30mg) columns and dried for TMT labeling. For TMT labeling, the samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile and 20 µg per sample were labeled with 40 µg TMTpro reagents for 1 hour at RT. The reaction was quenched using a 5% hydroxylamine solution in a 1:10 (vol/vol) ratio and incubation for 15 min. Samples were pooled and purified by a Waters Oasis Prime HLB column and dried for fractionation. The dried TMT multiplex was then resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammoniumbicarbonate for offline high pH reverse phase fractionation as described before (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.11.010). The resulting 96 fractions were cross concatenated into 24 fractions that were measured by SPS-MS3.

### Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry
All mass spectrometry data was acquired in centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system using a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) applying a spray voltage of 2.6 kV with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 32 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column, packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% Formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% Formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water (Buffer B).
For total proteome analysis, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method was used in order to minimize ratio compression as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 7 to 40% B over 90 minutes followed by a step-wise increase to 95% B in 6 minutes which was held for another 9 minutes. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target value of 4 x 105. The 20 most intense precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 per full scan were selected for fragmentation (“Top 20”) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th. MS2 scans were performed in the Ion trap (Turbo) using a maximum injection time of 50ms, AGC target value of 1.5 x 104 and fragmented using CID with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. SPS-MS3 scans for quantification were performed on the 10 most intense MS2 fragment ions with an isolation window of 0.7 Th (MS) and 2 m/z (MS2). Ions were fragmented using HCD with an NCE of 65% and analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200, scan range of 110-500 m/z, AGC target value of 1.5 x105 and a maximum injection time of 120ms. Repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors was limited by setting a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and 7 ppm and advanced peak determination was deactivated.

### Mass spectrometry data analysis
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database and E.coli K-12 reference database. Static modifications were set as TMTpro at the N-terminus and lysines and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the following dynamic modifications into account: Oxidation (M), Met-loss (Protein N-terminus), Acetyl (Protein N-terminus) and Met-loss acetyl (Protein N-terminus).

### Raw files

The RAW files are deposited at the Pride repository under the accession XXXXXXX.
